i am super thrilled to be introducing a
new performance from valencia james um
first of all valencia is a barbadian
freelance performer maker and researcher
interested in the intersection between
dance theater technology and activism
valencia's work explores remote
interdisciplinary collaboration with
creative technologists and how emerging
technologies like machine learning and
computer vision might enhance creativity
in her contemporary dance practice and
vice versa
this research has resulted in a
collaboratively built novel open source
software toolkit that pushed the
boundaries that pushes the boundaries of
live performance
in 2013 valencia co-founded the aim
project which explores the application
of machine learning and artificial
intelligence to dance
she was a 2020 rapid response fellow at
ibm where she co-founded the volumetric
performance toolbox a project that
responds to the global pandemic by
envisioning live online 3d dance
performance as a new way for artists to
connect to audiences from their living
spaces using minimal equipment
valencia was invited by golan levin to
join the spring 2021 remote residency
for open source software art tools at
carnegie mellon university's studio for
creative inquiry she's presented her
work at ted times de nubia ted times
goteborg the international joint
conference on artificial intelligence in
buenos aires
isea 2015 and most recently sig graph
2021 where this performance first um
was first debuted
uh the performance takes place in
mozilla hubs i'll be jumping off of your
screen and joining the participants in
the hub but we will be streaming the
performance live to you right now
um and with that just give us a few
moments as we get set up and we will
start streaming in just a second thank
you hey it seems we have to go ahead
so i'd like sandrine please take it away
greetings everyone welcome my name is
sandrine mallory and i'm pleased to
welcome you to suga a virtual
performance where we will embark on a
journey of remembrance and resilience to
honor our ancestors
i will be your experienced guide this
afternoon
i have a humanoid avatar
and this at this time please click on
this avatar and then hold the space bar
while clicking on the plus button so you
can turn my volume all the way up
so you can hear what i'm speaking and
the louder the louder i will be for you
and the closer you'll be to me the
louder i will be for you sorry
please note that mozilla hubs is an open
source streaming platform so the
performance may vary across
devices and internet bandwidth
so if you have any audio or visual
issues please simply refresh your
browsers and this should remedy the
problem
throughout the show we'll be changing
scenes when this happens your screen
will go dark at that time we invite you
to take a deep breath in
and out as you soften your gaze
now i'll pass you on to valencia
hello everyone i'm valencia james and i
am just
so thrilled uh to have you join us today
yes get closer to me if you need if
you're having trouble hearing me
feel free to get close
i just wanted to
share a few words
about
what brought us here today first of all
i just want to thank the
organizers of the gray area festival for
having us
and this is a
performance that is very dear to my
heart and that's because uh this time
last year we were all navigating the
effects of the global pandemic
and then came the brutal murder of
george floyd
and that set our communities in anguish
and at this time my coping mechanism
became
seeking a closer relationship to my
ancestors
and this is the starting point
of this piece that you're witnessing
here today
suga and this is a story of
commemoration of the struggles and
injustices
of our ancestors
and also of their resilience and of our
resilience and beauty because that's
what the pandemic really brought to
light for me
so this is a story of remembrance and
it's a tribute
to their struggles
another thing that came about due to the
pandemic
was
the whole
project that made that makes this
performance possible and that's the
volumetric performance
toolbox and in july last year i started
a collaboration
with the spatial interaction lab globox
and creative technologist store bluey
through the
i-beams rapid response fellowship and we
were responding to the closures of
theaters all around the globe
and
my idea was how can we as a well how can
performers get into the computer and
have performances
in virtual social virtual space
um that defies you know the the
lockdowns that we were experiencing how
can we have liveness and feeling of
togetherness
even though we're in our own respective
homes and that was the birth of the
volumetric performance toolbox and
this
performance that you'll experience today
and so what we've done has been
harnessing 3d video technology and
placing it in a low-cost lightweight kit
so that performers can
create these performances from their
living areas from the living spaces from
their living room i'm in my living room
you're in your living room
yet we are together in this virtual
space
and so during this experience we will um
we will
explore you know the injustices that our
ancestors experienced but also uh i will
give a dance tribute and you will see me
dancing live in a lighter scan of the
annenberg sugar mill
and
and this is something that that has been
very uh pressing for me and also very
special that i can imbue healing in a
space where so much injustice happened
and so we're very grateful for our
supporters ibeam and the studio for
creative inquiry at carnegie mellon
university
and also i'd like to especially
acknowledge and thank my collaborators
in creating this experience uh thomas
wester simon bowes holly newlands ren
vaseli sandrine mallory and terry ayanna
wright for their generous work in making
this happen as well as everyone who
supported this project in the past year
so thank you very much and i'm very much
looking forward to going on this journey
with you
i'll pass it back to sandrine who will
guide you along this experience
and i'll see you on the other side
thank you valencia
now before we embark on our journey let
me advise you
that some of the scenes may contain
sensitive content that may be triggering
for some individuals
just a warning
remember also that the seams will change
and when the screens go dark take a deep
breath in
and out as you soften your gaze
so
i will
[Music]
so
a
darkness
three months of darkness
shackles
moaning
and the smell
the smell of excrement
death
fear
we're terrified
never to see home again
[Music]
everybody get in line let's go
everybody up stand up
[Music]
seems like we've arrived
it's time to go up on deck
come towards the center of the stairs
and using your w key move up
forward and up the stairs
this was the voyage that brought more
than 10 million africans from the
continent to an unforgiving new world of
brutality and anguish
all in the name of suga to fatten the
pockets of europeans and africans
participating in the slave trade
we've arrived on the caribbean island of
saint john
if you look around you can see a sugar
mill not too far from here
hold down your mouse or your track pad
and scroll to look up down and all
around
but we can't stay here for too long
we've got to get on shore to start the
long walk into the force of
commemoration
it'll take all afternoon so let's get
going
remember that i will guide you so stay
close to me to hear me when your screen
goes dark simply relax your gaze then
inhale and exhale deeply and we will
meet again in the forest of
commemoration
welcome to the forest of commemoration
please join me at the map
of the island for a brief introduction
the danish claimed the island in 1718
and by 1728 there were over a hundred
sugar mill plantations on this island
right now we are in the woods
surrounding the annaberg plantation
it was established in 1722 with a
dungeon where rebellious slaves were
punished and a guard house to ensure no
slaves escaped
this was the way of the sugar plantation
system which had become the main
industry of the caribbean
by 1750 it made up a fifth of all
european imports this high demand for
sugar led to the barbaric treatment of a
stolen people
brefu was one of these people
a royal taken from the akuanu village
and enslaved on a plantation at coral
bay on the eastern coast of this island
take a walk now through the forest to
learn what she
and many others experienced in the name
of sugar
you
brefu
like so many others could no longer
tolerate the intense forced labor
in 1733
she empowered over 150 slaves to stand
up for their rights rebel against their
masters and take over the island
brethren's rebels took over a fort with
just knives
then signaled with cannon fire that it
was time to kill their masters
for nearly a year the akwamu people
with brethren as their leader
maintained control of most of saint john
the danes reclaimed the island with the
help of the french however
my apologies let us try that again
brefu like so many others could no
longer tolerate the intense forced labor
in 1733 she empowered over 150 slaves to
stand up for their rights rebel against
their masters and take over the island
brefu's rebels took a fort with just
knives then signaled with cannon fire
that it was time to kill their masters
for nearly a year the aquamu people with
brefu as their leader maintained control
of most of saint john
the danes reclaimed the island with the
help of the french
however they never got barefoot
she and 23 other kwamu rebels
ceremoniously committed suicide to avoid
being captured
the resistance the rebellion
the spark she could she's created
continued on this island and all over
the caribbean
each act of resistance inspired more and
more freedom fighters
amelia in guyana desalination
and many many more
we are who we are today because of them
look out now over your right over there
just past the edge of the forest
do you see the sugar mill in the
distance
imagine
brefu at its entryway with the rebels
having fought for freedom
the sugar mill itself then becomes a
symbol of their rebellion
we honor through ritual
we lift up their names we memorialize
our ancestors struggles and the wealth
it created
in all that is suga
come let's walk out together now to the
edge of the force towards the sugar mill
and then please take a moment of silence
for those who came before us
so
[Music]
we got sugar and we blood
my great grandmother had to leave her
young daughter in the care of another
to cut cane with her sons and burpees
guyana
my uncle was a manager at many factories
rose hall in guyana appleton in jamaica
my mother and her cousins learned to
swim in the trenches of cane fields
stealing kane was part of the everyday
mischief
we got sugar and we bloody plunged
blood
[Music]
do
[Applause]
[Music]
so
[Applause]
[Music]
uh
wow
our ancestors have ascended
can you see them
can you see them in the stars
our ancestors have ascended
our ancestors
have ascended
can you see yourselves in the stars
we are them
except
bye
our ancestors have ascended
can you see them in the stars
can you see yourselves in the stars
we are them
extending into our plane
and they are us
reflecting in theirs
so
thank you so much everyone
that is the end of our
presentation
we'll be continuing
for a q a
in the in the link using the chat and
video lounges this is the gray areas
uh
video lounge
and we will continue with a live q a uh
with with our
creative team
and
uh
and grey area festival curator
wade wallerstein so
please join us there we're here with us
uh to talk about the experience that
everyone just just witnessed um i'm here
with simo with with simon marin thomas
sandrine and valencia uh and i'm just so
thrilled that was such a moving
experience from you know the the the
movement on the ship to replicate the
experience of slaves passing the middle
passage to your dance performance which
was both somber and joyful um and you
know really captured so much emotion and
feeling thank you so much um valencia do
you want to introduce yourself a little
bit and perhaps introduce your team to
the audience
yes thank you so much wade for having us
i'm valencia james i am a performer
and i
work with
technology and i'm very interested in
how emerging technologies can push
creativity for dance performance and how
it can how we can tell stories that
don't usually get told and i am very
excited and happy and so grateful to
my my uh amazing collaborators here we
have
thomas wester of globox who
even we started this project last year
figuring out how do we you know create
liveness in um
in social virtual uh platforms and
there's a marina vaseline
amazing 3d artist and designer
sandrine mallory who's a
multi-disciplinary artist she was ex he
was guiding us through the experience
and simon bose
who's the guy behind the scenes who just
make sure the stream works and also
we d we designed uh
a
educational component of the project
volumetric performance toolbox where we
have
invited artists to learn how to create
their own
volumetric performances and so and holly
newlands i think is in video lounges
who the technical artists who helped us
get all the the point clouds and um
together so it's it's been really
amazing thank you so much and so happy
that you all could join me
wow yeah no it was really it was a it
was it was a really uh beautiful and
coordinated uh performance you guys are
a well oiled a well-oiled machine um
i you know you just mentioned the
volumetric performance toolbox and i
haven't talked about that too much um uh
as my under you know from my
understanding this is a an op this is an
open way that artists can uh use the
same technology that you use in order to
beam yourself into the mozilla hub space
that we just experienced can you tell us
a little bit about how
the performance works technology
technically and how you were able to to
produce it
i i would like to
pass that to
thomas but i will show my setup as well
so while thomas you take it away i'll
just show you uh the kit that
we designed um together sword louie and
thomas and the team at globox
yeah we're we were interested in uh
bringing people into a virtual space and
then also showing the performer
volumetrically so we created a
a small kit that uses a raspberry pi and
the intel realsense camera to create
this point cloud a live point cloud
stream of the performer
and then we place that in hubs mozilla
hubs which is using
webgl or web3d technology to kind of
render that all together so it's using a
pretty standard video streaming
technology what we're doing is
we're streaming both the rgb and then
also the depth map basically together as
a
as a stacked video and then we're using
a shader in hubs to um to unpack that
back into a volumetric so there's a lot
of tech speaker that's how it works
it's so cool and you know from my
understanding it's an extremely
accessible technology um in the sense
that it's low cost and relatively um
uh
you know not everybody has different
abilities with with technology i am but
certainly have my own issues but it's
relatively uh straightforward to to set
up um if you know an artist wants to you
know experiment with this toolbox how
can they get involved or how might they
be able to to use this you know tech in
their own in their own performances or
be able to access the the toolbox so to
speak there there's uh the default
answer is all the code is up on github
but that doesn't necessarily make it
easy um and i mean we're familiar we're
aware with that
we have um the codes available there and
then we have a medium page
that kind of walks through the work that
we did with the rapid response residency
so we have some documentation but the
best thing is to reach out to us to help
you help us guide you through the
process
the key thing is that that the kit and
what we were trying to do was create
something that didn't require
a laptop or very specific high-powered
machine which is hard to get to
sometimes and not everybody has access
to uh to create something that for under
300 you'd be able to put together and
have this stream
and that's how we use mozilla hubs
because it was an open platform that we
could customize easily to allow for that
awesome that's that's so cool um and i
can't wait to dig into the code and see
see for myself what i can cook up with
that i was really inspired by this um
just to shift focus a little bit um i
want to talk to sandrine about you know
the experience of narrating this project
and leading the the audience through
there are so many really emotional and
violent and honestly
you know
painful
subjects that you broach of course with
the history of slavery and the sugar
trade
how as a narrator do you approach
welcoming people into this space and
sharing this experience with different
kinds of people
i imagine that to be a a big task for
anyone
it's it's something that we discussed a
lot in preparation and how to navigate
the different rooms because each energy
was a little bit different uh we wanted
to treat everything with care and make
sure that we're
attentive to all the emotions that are
there so
really i
as a narrator i really just tried to be
a soothing voice and just be calm and
just kind of a presence that you could
anchor to
in the midst of all the insanity that's
happening around you or the information
that might be hard to process you always
know that you can follow my voice and
you know i'll take you back
basically
so i felt like it was
as a narrator as a guide it was to
anchor
energetically
absolutely and i think you did a
wonderful job of that you were super
soothing and i you know i really enjoyed
taking those moments in the transitions
to take a breath and reset and you know
enter the next space with a clean
palette um
you know i'm i'm curious uh for you know
for sanji and valencia you know you're
sharing this story with people of all
different races and identities um and
um
what has it been like for you and what
kind of feedback have you gotten from
sharing this experience with other
people who don't have the same uh who
don't have the same histories and the
same experiences as you do
and what is that
and how does that experience of sharing
this kind of impact the way that you
feel about the performance overall
it's been
largely very positive um but we did like
we were doing quite a couple tests and
inviting um our colleagues and and you
know friends and family
to
to enter the space as we were working
out you know different scenes and so one
thing that did
the really good feedback was that we
need to let people know that this can be
triggering especially for people of
african descent like it's very it is a
very difficult thing to
to come into especially in an immersive
uh like you know looking at um web web
vr
and so
and so that's been trying to do with
care um
has been and also to to honor the and to
be authentic with it as as possible you
can't do you can't really portray every
little fine detail because there's
limitation to the platform but how can
we do it with care
and authenticity
um sandrine
do you want
also navigating a balance
um striking that emotional cord but at
the same time you know providing the
levity of the beautiful point cloud
forest you know there's that contrast
that then gives you kind of like a an
ease
back into a different world so it's it's
the point cloud also i think just
visually it was different experiences so
that it felt softer after you've gone
through some of the trauma it becomes
softer so
but i've not experienced anything
negative from people response has been
positive and the critiques that we got
along the way we incorporated them we
worked with them and made sure that we
were
being very careful
absolutely um and you know in speaking
of the the aesthetic design of the point
cloud of forest um marie and i
understand that you were uh instrumental
in in building this space um and i'd
love to hear more about some of your
aesthetic inspiration and you know how
you put together this really you know
what you know for lack of a better word
sacred sacred space
yeah well um as far as uh the point
clouds go that is a holly um
thing so maybe i add in the chat or or
sorry if they can add in the chat or if
they're listening in um but if so then
maybe they'll expand on that a little
bit um so but i can say because i do
know a little bit about what holly did
and we did work really closely together
so basically everything that's point
cloud in the scenes holly placed there
and everything that's not i i built in
the scene so
um and then we we collaborated
heavily of course with valencia who is
art directing
um this piece so that's that's kind of
how the 3d art came to be but as far as
the um point cloud it's actually really
amazing and i mean holly add to this if
you're if you're listening and you're in
the chat but it's made um from actual
space spatial data of um the annaberg
sugar mill so it's actually uh holly
actually was able to ex like turn that
spatial data into point cloud um
and yeah and then extract certain parts
of it like there's a forest that's
actually around the mill and when you're
in the forest scene um that's a real
moment from from that space so i think
that's
honestly one of the most amazing things
about this piece is the use of that
spatial data um which i believe valencia
found and and then um
holly manipulated and so that was just
that yeah it's really cool
um
and yeah i think we we definitely
talked a lot about went back and forth a
lot about how we kind of incorporate
this light point cloud spatial data with
kind of the heaviness of 3d objects and
especially a lot of low poly objects
because it is you know an online
platform and we're trying to keep speeds
quick um for internet and such so i
think you know it was a process for us
to figure out how those things can can
work together um instead of kind of
having a contrast or how we can make
that contrast
look nice so i think you know we played
around with that a lot like oh do we
want objects in the forest we want this
in the forest or do we want these like
floating images like how do we create a
museum
um so yeah all those things and then i
would say um
yeah actually um terry terry wright also
um is another artist who helped along
the way and um she also worked on the
cosmos scene um those illustrations were
hers which
are really beautiful as well and i i
like that scene a lot it's really
powerful to me because it's this space
where you kind of reflect on on the
whole performance so i think the
immersiveness um that like terry and i
created in there um
with with those illustrations and then
with uh sandrine's voice
yeah so it's interesting like i feel
like you know everything that we did
visually and spatially is
so dependent on also on the audio and
you know also in valencia's performance
and so i feel like there's a really
powerful like yeah mesh going on there
um we did have some really amazing
feedback about uh the boat scene um the
yeah the middle passage scene which
was a little it's actually interesting
because it's actually kind of the
opposite of the question you're asking
about like or how we were talking about
if it's like too much for people or you
know um how it is it was actually just a
vote and we got some feedback that like
wait this isn't this isn't what was
going on like we we would say like
santorini's vocals describe the
conditions of the slave ship but we got
some feedback that like we need to like
make that more more visceral and more
real and i think um valencia and i
worked on that um
coming up to the festival so that's a
new addition to the piece and i think um
yeah that that
is also
a really powerful moment so yeah it was
just it's just such a sensory overload
that completely resets you as you enter
that first scene and you hear the crack
of the whip um it sent a shiver down my
spine absolutely um it's so so powerful
um
on you know i don't want to take two i
don't want to take too much time or be
too long-winded about this but i do have
one more question for you valencia um
you know
this story is something that has as you
say the the sugar trade has shaped so
much wealth in the world particularly in
the western world um and was so
extractive and damaging in so many
different ways
and i was wondering if you could talk a
little bit about the contemporary and
modern day impact of the sugar trade
and kind of how this performance speaks
to the current moment that we're living
in
thank you for that question wade um
one of the one of the main like drives
to create this piece has been that
um
i found like in my experience there is
not enough like knowledge like among my
peers and my colleagues especially even
in the theater world
around the impacts the real impacts of
the transatlantic slave trade and the
sugar
trade
on today's world
and so it was it was a point of a big
frustration because as a black person
you just feel it and you and you
experience it every day
and there's a lot that of trauma that i
was holding even ancestral trauma
that was coming out because of my work
and realizing like oh my goodness it's
not only in my head it's it's real
and the fact that
first of all
so much wealth like an unimaginable
wealth was generated in the caribbean
and also the legislation and the whole
foundation of
policing black people
was
founded right there with legislation
um
it has made such an impact and it and it
stays with us because a lot of
legislation is still the same
um that wealth is still in the hands of
of those people who you know traded with
slaves and it's not just the people who
owned slaves it was a huge banking
um
establishment there's a huge system and
that wealth is still in the hands of of
those heirs
and you know even people who are like
the cousin of the queen
had property in jamaica in barbados i i
i would encourage you to look at the
work of hillary beckhaus
and um queen mother
um dorothy
she is a scholar
from from i.t
and also talking they're talking about
the legacy of of this history is still
very much here and i mean think of
police brutality today
and mass incarceration
it's just and when you look at the
history you see it's just a continuation
it's a continuum
and if we
can really grasp people from all walks
of life can grasp it's not just the
black history is all of our history
if we can grasp that i think it can help
us to point us to what needs to change
and how
to create a system of um justice and
reparations
it needs to happen because it's not
going to happen if we keep the stand the
status quo
so
yeah i i think if we can understand the
history we can understand a bit better
how to shape the
future absolutely um and it's it's such
an important and cogent reminder um that
was just so meaningful to to be rooted
in in such a
sensory way um i was you know going
through the performance today and just
thinking about wow i wish that i had
seen this as a kid in school when i was
learning this history and i was able to
interact with it and really you know at
least in a small way feel some of the
emotions and the feelings that um you're
attempting to evoke in the in the
audience
so thank you so much for that and thank
you so much for this you know really
prescient reminder of what's currently
going on this wealth is still there um
and these are the protocols these are
the systems of control around us um this
is exactly what we want to get into with
the festival um and what we want to
point out because we can't change the
protocol if we aren't fully uh cognizant
of what it is we have to know it we have
to feel it in order to to make a change
um thank you all so
much thank you i just want to add also
put out there that this project is is
also about um artists um really being
able to
create their own worlds
and so simon bose has done an amazing
job with make putting together a medium
page and documenting
we have resources available for anyone
who wants to
approach this type of way of creating
and telling your stories
and we drop it in the chat but i don't
have it right here it's medium
or
medium volumetric performance toolbox so
simon you can
talk about that
that's awesome
some quick background on that is um last
winter uh with support from ibeam um we
after doing our first pilot performance
we ran this as an educational program
where rather than you know work on that
first performance we did which is what
you just saw or a new version of it um
we worked with other artists to build
their own so
you know we developed these um kits that
cost 100 hundred dollars it's a
raspberry pi it's a real sense camera um
we shipped them out to people and then
we did a series of you know totally
remote workshops you know um
thomas and holly and and i are in
portland oregon you know valencia's in
california marines in california
hendrian in california too a lot of the
artists were in new york um
and all across the country
but we you know came together
through zoom through hubs and kind of
figured out how to uh build a showcase
of people building their own world and
their own performances so
on that medium page
we've posted quite a few most of our
the recordings of our zoom sessions and
the workshops we did
so there's technical um
walkthroughs you can learn exactly how
to use the kit um all the
materials needed for one are on there
there's still a question of you know how
you access our servers but that's why we
say reach out to us and we'll help you
get set up but you can also learn about
the why of the project um there's some
interviews with other artists or
advisors
so it goes beyond just the technical and
the how
wow what an amazing resource for people
and what a brilliant mission um i
encourage all everyone in the audience
to go and check out those resources and
experiment with this technology and to
keep thinking about these ideas watch
the performance again the recording will
be up online and really feel it um and
these stories in these histories as we
honor um as we honor the uh
the uh as we honor the history of of the
slave trade and of black people in the
caribbean and throughout the western
world
wow um with with you know that was so
rich thank you so much to the whole team
um and i think that that is going to
draw a close on the live stream portion
of gray area festival day one
thanks everyone who came out this was it
was really great to chat with some of
you guys in the in the chat um now we'll
be transitioning to our video lounge uh
please come in uh join us we'll be there
hanging out having conversation and
continuing uh to talk about some of
these really important ideas um with
that uh this is wade signing off i will
see everyone back here tomorrow at 5 p.m
pacific time thanks so much